Polkadot Protocol > Basics > Randomness (#113)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: polkadot-protocol/basics/randomness.md

---
title: Randomness
description: TODO
---

# Randomness

Randomness is crucial in **Proof of Stake** blockchains to ensure a fair and unpredictable distribution of validator duties. 

However, computers are inherently deterministic, meaning the same input always produces the same output. What we typically refer to as "random" numbers on a computer are actually pseudo-random. 

These numbers rely on an initial "seed", which can come from external sources like [atmospheric noise](https://www.random.org/randomness/){target=\_blank}, [heart rates](https://mdpi.altmetric.com/details/47574324){target=\_blank}, or even [lava lamps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lavarand){target=\_blank}. While this may seem random, given the same "seed", the same sequence of numbers will always be generated.

> In a global blockchain network, relying on real-world entropy for randomness isn’t feasible because these inputs vary by time and location. If nodes use different inputs, blockchains can fork. Hence, real-world randomness isn't suitable for use as a seed in blockchain systems.

Reviewer: you are right, I got it the other way around haha

> Currently, two primary methods for generating randomness in blockchains are used: `RANDAO` and `VRF` (Verifiable Random Function). Polkadot adopts the `VRF` approach for its randomness.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, two primary methods for generating randomness in blockchains are used: RANDAO and VRF (Verifiable Random Function). Polkadot adopts the VRF approach for its randomness.
```

## VRF

A **Verifiable Random Function (VRF)** is a cryptographic function that generates a random number along with a proof that ensures the number was produced by the submitter. This proof allows anyone to verify the validity of the random number.

> Polkadot's VRF is similar to the one used in [**Ouroboros Praos**](https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/573.pdf){target=\_blank}, which secures randomness for block production in systems like [BABE](link to BABE page) (Polkadot’s block production mechanism). 

Reviewer: I suggest using the flag `TODO:update-path` when we need to add a reference to a page that does not exist yet. This way, we can do `Ctrl+F` through the whole repo and find those occurrences easily :)

```suggestion
Polkadot's VRF is similar to the one used in [**Ouroboros Praos**](https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/573.pdf){target=\_blank}, which secures randomness for block production in systems like [BABE](TODO:update-path){target=\_blank} (Polkadot’s block production mechanism). 
```

The key difference is that Polkadot's VRF doesn’t rely on a central clock—avoiding the issue of whose clock to trust. Instead, it uses its own past results and slot numbers to simulate time and determine future outcomes.

**Here's how VRF works:**

Slots on Polkadot are discrete units of time, each lasting six seconds, and can potentially hold a block. Multiple slots form an epoch, with 2400 slots making up one four-hour epoch.

> In each slot, validators execute a **"die roll"** using a **Verifiable Random Function (VRF)**. The VRF uses three inputs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In each slot, validators execute a "die roll" using a VRF. The VRF uses three inputs:
```

VRF acronym was already introduced, no need to do it again

> 1. A "secret key", unique to each validator, used for the die roll.
> 2. An epoch randomness value, derived from the hash of VRF outputs from blocks two epochs ago (N-2), so past randomness influences the current epoch (N).
> 3. The current slot number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A "secret key", unique to each validator, is used for the die roll
2. An epoch randomness value, derived from the hash of VRF outputs from blocks two epochs ago (N-2), so past randomness influences the current epoch (N)
3. The current slot number
```

This process helps maintain fair randomness across the network.

Here is a graphical representation

![](/images/polkadot-protocol/basics/blocks-transactions-fees/randomness/slots-epochs.webp)

The `VRF` produces two outputs: a `RESULT` (the random number) and a `PROOF` (verifying that the number was generated correctly).

> The `RESULT` is checked by validator against a threshold set by the protocol. If it's below the threshold, the validator becomes a candidate for block production in that slot. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The result is checked by the validator against a protocol threshold. If it's below the threshold, the validator becomes a candidate for block production in that slot. 
```

The validator then attempts to create a block, submitting it along with the `PROOF` and `RESULT`.

> 

Reviewer: @kapetan3sid I'm unsure if this overlaps too much with the content you wrote, but IMHO, this seems like something cool to have for those who are getting onboarded with this topic. Feel free to modify it or discard it in case you disagree

```suggestion
So, VRF can be expressed like:

`(RESULT, PROOF) = VRF(SECRET, EPOCH_RANDOMNESS_VALUE, CURRENT_SLOT_NUMBER)`

Put simply, performing a "VRF roll" generates a random number along with proof that the number was genuinely produced and not arbitrarily chosen.

After executing the VRF, the RESULT is compared to a protocol-defined THRESHOLD. If the RESULT is below the THRESHOLD, the validator becomes a valid candidate to propose a block for that slot. Otherwise, the validator skips the slot.

As a result, there may be multiple validators eligible to propose a block for a slot. In this case, the block accepted by other nodes will prevail, provided it is on the chain with the latest finalized block as determined by the GRANDPA finality gadget. It's also possible for no block producers to be available for a slot, in which case the AURA consensus takes over. AURA is a fallback mechanism that randomly selects a validator to produce a block, running in parallel with BABE and only stepping in when no block producers exist for a slot. Otherwise, it remains inactive.

```

Because validators roll independently, it's possible that no block candidates appear in some slots if all roll numbers above the threshold. 

!!!note

>     How we resolve this issue and make sure that Polkadot block times remain near constant-time can be checked on [PoS Consensus]() page.

Reviewer: We avoid using "we" "ours" and so on

```suggestion
    The resolution of this issue and the assurance that Polkadot block times remain near constant-time can be checked on the [PoS Consensus](TODO:update-path){target=_blank} page.
```

To enhance security, `RANDAO` can be optionally combined with a **Verifiable Delay Function (VDF)**, ensuring that the randomness can't be predicted or manipulated during computation.

!!!note
    More information about `RANDAO` can be found in the [ETH documentation](https://eth2book.info/capella/part2/building_blocks/randomness/){target=\_blank}

## VDFs

**Verifiable Delay Functions (VDFs)** are time-bound computations that, even on parallel computers, take a set amount of time to complete. 

They produce a unique result that can be quickly verified publicly. When combined with `RANDAO`, feeding `RANDAO`'s output into a `VDF` introduces a delay that nullifies an attacker's chance to influence the randomness.

However, `VDF` likely require specialized ASIC devices to run, separate from standard nodes. 

!!!warning 
    While only one is needed to secure the system and they will be open-source and inexpensive, running them involves significant costs without any direct incentives, adding friction for blockchain users.

## Additional Resources

> - [Polkadot's research on blockchain randomness and sortition](https://research.web3.foundation/Polkadot/protocols/block-production){target=\_blank} - Contains reasoning for choices made along with proofs
> - [Discussion on Randomness used in Polkadot](https://github.com/use-ink/ink/issues/57){target=\_blank} - W3F researchers discuss the randomness in Polkadot and when it is usable and under which assumptions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Polkadot's research on blockchain randomness and sortition](https://research.web3.foundation/Polkadot/protocols/block-production){target=\_blank} - contains reasoning for choices made along with proofs
- [Discussion on Randomness used in Polkadot](https://github.com/use-ink/ink/issues/57){target=\_blank} - W3F researchers discuss the randomness in Polkadot and when it is usable and under which assumptions
```

1. A "secret key", unique to each validator, is used for the die roll
2. An epoch randomness value, derived from the hash of VRF outputs from blocks two epochs ago (N-2), so past randomness influences the current epoch (N)
3. The current slot number

This process helps maintain fair randomness across the network.

Here is a graphical representation:

![](/images/polkadot-protocol/basics/blocks-transactions-fees/randomness/slots-epochs.webp)

The VRF produces two outputs: a result (the random number) and a proof (verifying that the number was generated correctly).

The result is checked by the validator against a protocol threshold. If it's below the threshold, the validator becomes a candidate for block production in that slot. 

The validator then attempts to create a block, submitting it along with the `PROOF` and `RESULT`.
So, VRF can be expressed like:

`(RESULT, PROOF) = VRF(SECRET, EPOCH_RANDOMNESS_VALUE, CURRENT_SLOT_NUMBER)`

Put simply, performing a "VRF roll" generates a random number along with proof that the number was genuinely produced and not arbitrarily chosen.

> 

Reviewer: I'm being nitpicking here, sorry!

```suggestion
```

After executing the VRF, the RESULT is compared to a protocol-defined THRESHOLD. If the RESULT is below the THRESHOLD, the validator becomes a valid candidate to propose a block for that slot. Otherwise, the validator skips the slot.

As a result, there may be multiple validators eligible to propose a block for a slot. In this case, the block accepted by other nodes will prevail, provided it is on the chain with the latest finalized block as determined by the GRANDPA finality gadget. It's also possible for no block producers to be available for a slot, in which case the AURA consensus takes over. AURA is a fallback mechanism that randomly selects a validator to produce a block, running in parallel with BABE and only stepping in when no block producers exist for a slot. Otherwise, it remains inactive.

Because validators roll independently, no block candidates may appear in some slots if all roll numbers are above the threshold.

> 

Reviewer: @0xLucca wdyt about adding here this reference: https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sp_consensus_babe/fn.make_vrf_sign_data.html

Something like: "To see an example of the implementation of the VRF in the polkadot-sdk, you can check out..."

In each slot, validators execute a "die roll" using a VRF. The VRF uses three inputs:

1. A "secret key", unique to each validator, is used for the die roll
2. An epoch randomness value, derived from the hash of VRF outputs from blocks two epochs ago (N-2), so past randomness influences the current epoch (N)
3. The current slot number

This process helps maintain fair randomness across the network.

Here is a graphical representation:

![](/images/polkadot-protocol/basics/blocks-transactions-fees/randomness/slots-epochs.webp)

The VRF produces two outputs: a result (the random number) and a proof (verifying that the number was generated correctly).

The result is checked by the validator against a protocol threshold. If it's below the threshold, the validator becomes a candidate for block production in that slot. 

The validator then attempts to create a block, submitting it along with the `PROOF` and `RESULT`.
So, VRF can be expressed like:

`(RESULT, PROOF) = VRF(SECRET, EPOCH_RANDOMNESS_VALUE, CURRENT_SLOT_NUMBER)`

Put simply, performing a "VRF roll" generates a random number along with proof that the number was genuinely produced and not arbitrarily chosen.

> After executing the VRF, the RESULT is compared to a protocol-defined THRESHOLD. If the RESULT is below the THRESHOLD, the validator becomes a valid candidate to propose a block for that slot. Otherwise, the validator skips the slot.

Reviewer 3: `PROOF` and `RESULT` are formatted differently here vs. above.

> As a result, there may be multiple validators eligible to propose a block for a slot. In this case, the block accepted by other nodes will prevail, provided it is on the chain with the latest finalized block as determined by the GRANDPA finality gadget. It's also possible for no block producers to be available for a slot, in which case the AURA consensus takes over. AURA is a fallback mechanism that randomly selects a validator to produce a block, running in parallel with BABE and only stepping in when no block producers exist for a slot. Otherwise, it remains inactive.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As a result, there may be multiple validators eligible to propose a block for a slot. In this case, the block accepted by other nodes will prevail, provided it is on the chain with the latest finalized block as determined by the GRANDPA finality gadget. It's also possible for no block producers to be available for a slot, in which case the AURA consensus takes over. AURA(https://docs.substrate.io/learn/consensus/#aura){target=\_blank} is a fallback mechanism that randomly selects a validator to produce a block, running in parallel with BABE and only stepping in when no block producers exist for a slot. Otherwise, it remains inactive.
```

Reviewer 2: We would need to use a different link since Substrate docs is going away

!!!note
    More information about RANDAO can be found in the [ETH documentation](https://eth2book.info/capella/part2/building_blocks/randomness/){target=\_blank}.

## VDFs

Verifiable Delay Functions (VDFs) are time-bound computations that, even on parallel computers, take a set amount of time to complete. 

They produce a unique result that can be quickly verified publicly. When combined with RANDAO, feeding RANDAO's output into a VDF introduces a delay that nullifies an attacker's chance to influence the randomness.

However, VDF likely requires specialized ASIC devices to run separately from standard nodes.

!!!warning 
    While only one is needed to secure the system, and they will be open-source and inexpensive, running them involves significant costs without direct incentives, adding friction for blockchain users.

## Additional Resources

- [Polkadot's research on blockchain randomness and sortition](https://research.web3.foundation/Polkadot/protocols/block-production){target=\_blank} - contains reasoning for choices made along with proofs

> - [Discussion on Randomness used in Polkadot](https://github.com/use-ink/ink/issues/57){target=\_blank} - W3F researchers discuss the randomness in Polkadot and when it is usable and under which assumptions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Discussion on Randomness used in Polkadot](https://github.com/use-ink/ink/issues/57){target=\_blank} - W3F researchers explore when and under what conditions Polkadot's randomness can be utilized
```

To enhance security, RANDAO can optionally be combined with a Verifiable Delay Function (VDF), ensuring that randomness can't be predicted or manipulated during computation.

!!!note
    More information about RANDAO can be found in the [ETH documentation](https://eth2book.info/capella/part2/building_blocks/randomness/){target=\_blank}.

## VDFs

Verifiable Delay Functions (VDFs) are time-bound computations that, even on parallel computers, take a set amount of time to complete. 

They produce a unique result that can be quickly verified publicly. When combined with RANDAO, feeding RANDAO's output into a VDF introduces a delay that nullifies an attacker's chance to influence the randomness.

However, VDF likely requires specialized ASIC devices to run separately from standard nodes.

!!!warning 
    While only one is needed to secure the system, and they will be open-source and inexpensive, running them involves significant costs without direct incentives, adding friction for blockchain users.

## Additional Resources

> - [Polkadot's research on blockchain randomness and sortition](https://research.web3.foundation/Polkadot/protocols/block-production){target=\_blank} - contains reasoning for choices made along with proofs
> - [Discussion on Randomness used in Polkadot](https://github.com/use-ink/ink/issues/57){target=\_blank} - W3F researchers explore when and under what conditions Polkadot's randomness can be utilized

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [**Polkadot's research on blockchain randomness and sortition**](https://research.web3.foundation/Polkadot/protocols/block-production){target=\_blank} - contains reasoning for choices made along with proofs
- [**Discussion on Randomness used in Polkadot**](https://github.com/use-ink/ink/issues/57){target=\_blank} - W3F researchers explore when and under what conditions Polkadot's randomness can be utilized
```
